Cystic fibrosis is a genetic disease that
affects the lungs,
pancreas, and other organs by producing
thick,
sticky secretions that disrupt normal
function.
At the core of this disease is a defective
CFTR protein,
which normally regulates chloride and
water movement across cell membranes.
Without proper CFTR function, secretions
become dehydrated and thick,
leading to airway obstruction, mucus
plugging,
and chronic infection.
In the lungs, this creates a cycle of
obstruction,
infection, and inflammation.
Thick mucus traps bacteria, most notably
Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
leading to repeated infections.
Over time, this causes airway damage,
bronchiectasis, and progressive decline in
lung function.
As respiratory therapists, it's critical
to recognize that airway clearance,
not just bronchodilation, is a primary
priority in cystic fibrosis
care.
Patients often present with chronic cough,
fixed butum production,
frequent respiratory infections, and
decreased exercise tolerance.
You may also see signs outside the lungs,
such as
pancreatic insufficiency, malnutrition,
and failure to
thrive, especially in pediatric patients.
A key diagnostic test is the sweat
chloride test, where
elevated chloride levels confirm impaired
CFTR function.
Management focuses on improving mucus
clearance, controlling infection,
and supporting nutrition.
Airway clearance techniques like chest
physiotherapy, oscillatory devices,
and high-frequency chest wall oscillation
are essential.
Medications include bronchodilators,
mucolytics like Dornase Alpha,
hyperatomic saline to hydrate secretions,
and inhaled antibiotics for chronic
infections.
CFTR modulators target the underlying
defect in select patients and can significantly improve outcomes.
Red flags include increasing sputum,
worsening cough,
declining oxygenation, and fatigue.
These may signal an exacerbation.
From an RT perspective, always assess
secretion burden,
effectiveness of airway clearance, breath
sounds,
oxygenation, and patient adherence to
therapy.
The key takeaway is that cystic fibrosis
is not just an obstructive disease,
it is a secretion and infection-driven
disease.
Effective management depends on aggressive
airway clearance, infection control,
and long-term multidisciplinary care.